 Day 5 :  Configure Switch Ports
Objective:
 Practice enabling and disabling switch ports on a Cisco switch using the command-line interface (CLI), along with additional configurations such as port descriptions, speed/duplex settings, and basic port security.

Lab Environment Requirements:
Cisco switch (physical or simulated using Cisco Packet Tracer, GNS3, or similar tool)

Console access to the switch
erminal software (e.g., PuTTY, Tera Term, or built-in simulator terminal)

Lab Tasks:
1. Access the Switch:
Connect to the switch via console or terminal.

Enter privileged EXEC mode:
Switch> enable


2. Enter Global Configuration Mode:
Enter configuration mode:
Switch# configure terminal


3. Select a Specific Interface to Configure:
Replace 0/1 with the actual port number if needed:
Switch(config)# interface fastethernet 0/1


4. Disable the Port:
Administratively shut down the selected interface:
Switch(config-if)# shutdown



5. Enable the Port:
Reactivate the interface:
Switch(config-if)# no shutdown



6. Configure a Port Description:
Add a description to the port to identify its function:
Switch(config-if)# description Server Connection



7. Set Speed and Duplex:
Manually set the port speed and duplex mode (for instance, to 100 Mbps Full Duplex):
Switch(config-if)# speed 100
Switch(config-if)# duplex full
This is useful when the auto-negotiation fails or specific settings are needed.



8. Enable Port Security:
Set basic port security to limit the number of MAC addresses learned on the port:
Switch(config-if)# switchport port-security
Switch(config-if)# switchport port-security maximum 2
Switch(config-if)# switchport port-security violation restrict
Explanation: This restricts the port to a maximum of 2 MAC addresses and will restrict traffic if more addresses are learned.




9. Exit Configuration Mode:
After configuration, exit to return to global mode:
Switch(config-if)# exit
Switch(config)# exit



10. Verify Port Status and Configuration:
Use the following command to confirm the current status of all interfaces:
Switch# show interfaces status
To verify a specific port’s configuration:
Switch# show running-config interface fastethernet 0/1
To check port security settings:
Switch# show port-security interface fastethernet 0/1



Expected Results:
The selected port will be administratively disabled and re-enabled.
The port will have an updated description, and speed/duplex settings will be applied.
Port security will be activated, restricting the number of MAC addresses allowed.
All changes will be reflected when verifying port status and configuration.



Troubleshooting Tips:
If the port does not come back online after running no shutdown, verify that the physical cable is connected and that the device on the other side is powered on.
If the interface status is "err-disabled," check for errors related to port security violations or other configuration issues.